Cloud Service Models: Exploration
of Choices.
There are many levels of services that
you can get from cloud providers.
Any cloud computing discussion will
involve terms like application
as a service, platform as a service,
and infrastructure as a service.
All of these refer to business
models around using the cloud
with different levels of engagement and
servicing similar to rental agreements.
IaaS, infrastructure as a service, can be
defined as a bare minimum rental service.
This is like renting a truck from
a company that you can assume has hardware
and you do the packing of your furniture,
and drive to your new house.
You as the user of the service install and
maintain an operating system,
and other applications in
the infrastructure as a service model.
The Amazon EC2 cloud is a good example for
this model.
PaaS, platform as a service,
is the model where a user is provided
with an entire computing platform.
This could include the operating system
and programming languages that you need.
It could extend to include the database
of your choice, or even a web server.
You can develop, and
run your own application software,
on top of these layers.
The Google App engine and Microsoft Azure
are two examples of this model.
SaaS, the software as a service model,
is the model
in which the cloud service provider takes
the responsibilities for the hardware and
software environment such as the operating
system and the application software.
This means you can work on using
the application to solve your problem.
Dropbox is a very popular
software as a service platform.
Ultimately, the decision of which service
you want to explore is a function of
several variables.
It depends on the skill level of your
team to handle computing environment,
development and maintenance.
It also depends on how you
might need to use the service.
You need to pick the right
service model that
best fits you in terms of long term goals.
Finally, when you're deploying a cloud
service you also have to understand
all the security risks, since your
data resides on third party service.
Security is a very important
aspect in today's world of growing
digitization of information.
You must make your client's
data safety a top priority,
and hence this should be an important
criteria in your decision.
All the security risks
must be understood and
evaluated as your data resides
on third party servers.
We are seeing other forms
of services being added
to the family of cloud services.
The logic of infrastructure, platform, and
Software as a Service is
getting extended further.
XaaS is an umbrella term that signifies
even finer-grain control over computing
resources that you want to rent.
For example, storage as a service,
communication as a service,
marketing as a service, and so on.
As a summary, infrastructure as a service,
platform as a service, and application
as a service are three main class service
models that are being used with success.
Picking one will depend on the number
of variables which are company's goals.
These three models have
inspired many similar models
to emerge around cloud computing.